# Reported Problems #
  1. VMT will become unresponsive if one version of VMT is open and another version is opened at the Matlab command prompt.  Resolve this problem by closing and restarting VMT.
  1. Primary (streamwise) velocities may appear to be negative in the contour plot for cross sections oriented such that the left bank easting value is west of the right bank easting value (original program assumed the left back is the easternmost bank).  The plots are correct, rather than looking downstream in the contour plots, these plots are shown looking upstream and primary velocities are negative. (Fixed in version 1.1)
  1. Sometimes a MatLab error will result in the command window (something like “undefined variable z”) when trying to Replot the figures.  This has only occurred when KMZ output is selected and Google Earth is open.  It appears to be an issue between MatLab and Google Earth.  To fix the problem, simply close Google Earth and Replot (you can leave ‘Output KMZ File’ checked).  Google Earth will reopen with the updated plot.  I will try to solve this issue when I can reproduce it.
  1. An error has been reported involving too many input parameters to the function ‘nansum’.  Older versions of Matlab have a version of nansum that does not allow summing over specified dimensions of a matrix.  I have included in the VMT directory the function ‘nansum’ that works.  This should solve this problem.  (Fixed in version 1.1)
  1. If Google Earth is left open, the data set with which it was first opened may reappear when running the “replot” command even after a new data set has been loaded (I am working in a fix for this).   Close Google Earth after each cross section is processed and try to only select the KMZ output box after all replotting is done (replot command reruns the GE export each time the button is pressed).
  1. VMT appears not to work with MatLab 6.5.  There seems to be an issue with loading the GUI related to forward compatability.  Try using the compiled version or update Matlab.
  1. VMT Google Earth output may not properly plot with newer versions of GE and VMT 2.3b and earlier due to a change in the data format by GE.  Try updating VMT to 2.4b or later if you have this issue.